**Precision Public Health: Application of AI to social media to characterize information dissemination on coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)**
===============================================================================================================================================

**Background **
---------------

In early December 2019, patients with pneumonia of unknown origin were
identified in Wuhan city, China. The causative agent was identified as a
member of coronavirus family, initially named 2019 novel coronavirus
(2019-nCoV), and associated disease as coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19). Initial cases of the disease presented with acute severe
respiratory syndrome starting with fever and respiratory symptoms.
However, a spectrum of illness from mild to severe disease has been
described in the more recent reports. Emerging data suggests that about
15% of patients require critical care and case fatality rate is about
1-2%.

 

Sustained human-to-human transmission has been confirmed in China. Since
its emergence, the virus has spread to 25 countries outside of China
with limited human-to human spread in various settings.

On January 30, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a public
health emergency of international concern. As of February 13, 2020,
about 47,054 laboratory-confirmed cases have been documented globally,
99% of these are in China, mainly in Wuhan, Hubei province.

Since the initial reports of cluster of acute severe respiratory disease
(COVID-19) and the potential for global spread, there has been
widespread discussion and dissemination of information through social
media. A lot of the information circulating on social media is false,
misleading, and alarmist. The nature of some of the information and
conversations on social media has also taken a discriminatory tone. This
kind of information could not only hamper response efforts, but has also
increased anxiety and panic about the risk of infection, risk of severe
disease, prevention, and treatment. The feeling of anxiety in the
population, in part can be assessed by increased demands and shortages
for face masks and hand sanitizers even in countries such as Canada
where only 7 cases have been confirmed to date.

 

Misinformation also affected Ebola outbreak. The identification,
characterization, and tackling of misinformation on social media during
the Ebola outbreak contributed to the successful response in West
Africa. However, since the Ebola outbreak, the scale of misinformation
has grown significantly. While the application of artificial
intelligence (AI) techniques are relatively new to public health, they
could contribute to rapid characterization and the tackling of
misinformation through text analytics.

 

**Aims**
--------

We propose to (a) characterize misinformation on social media related to
coronavirus, its origins, and its propagation, (b) develop a platform
aimed at monitoring misinformation and (c) develop strategies and
systems to tackle misinformation.

**Approach and Plan **
----------------------

We will assemble a team including public health, AI text analysis,
communication, and planning experts to identify and refine needs and
guide implementation team in their analysis.

We will collect tweets from twitter using various hashtags used along
with COIVD-19 tweets. To assess changes in the information spread over
time, we will collect tweets starting mid-November, about 3-4 weeks
before any news related to COVID-19.

To characterize misinformation related to COVID-19, we will apply AI
techniques to Twitter data. We will use previously established and novel
approaches for text analysis to parse out topics, aspects, and
sentiments (positive or negative emotions) attached to these aspects
through aspect base sentiment analysis and topic modelling. The results
of these analyses will be refined by manual review to refine algorithms
and to provide the intended results in terms of identification and
classification of information. In addition, we will use discourse
parsing at the conversation level in order to understand underlying
conversation structure to avenues for interventions. We will also track
evolution of information content and varsity over time and across
geographic areas.

Based on the above analysis, we will use twitter stream data and to
apply algorithm to identify tweets spreading false information. This
could be used to tackle information in real time.

 

** Potential outcomes**
-----------------------

This project will characterize misinformation on social media, in
particular on Twitter, with the aim to develop an automated system to
characterize and identify the spread of false information on Twitter.
The system could allow public health practitioners to develop counter
messaging to alleviate anxiety and decrease the spread and impact of
false information.

**Team**
--------

Naveed Janjua, *MBBS, DrPH, Executive Director Data and Analytic
Services, BCCDC, expertise in epidemiology, public health and data*

Giuseppe Carenini, *PhD, Professor, Computer Science Department, UBC &
expert in natural language processing and text analytics*

HyeJu Jang *PhD, Postdoc Fellow BCCDC, UBC Computer sciences, expert in
text analytics*

Katie Fenn*, Director Quality and Safety, BCCDC*

Emily Remple**,** *Knowledge Translation Lead BCCDC*

**Resources needed **
---------------------

In order to reach our objectives, we will require resources for the
following activities:

-   Twitter data feed

-   Computer programmer

-   Subject matter expert (public health /communication) for data
    > annotation

-   Review of results
