# Complete summary

Summarize your research proposal (maximum 1 page). 
Note that your summary must also address how the research proposed is aligned with the objectives of this call and one of the research areas.

Objectives

(Updated: 2020-02-14)

The specific objectives of the Canadian COVID-19 rapid research funding opportunity are to:

- Contribute to the global response to the COVID-19 outbreak;
- Enhance local, national and/or international collaborative efforts to mitigate the rapid spread of COVID-19 and its potential negative consequences;
- Strengthen the understanding of the impact of COVID-19 on individuals and communities; and
- Provide evidence to inform clinical and public health response, and/or decision-making and planning at national and international levels.

Evaluation Criteria

To support the strategic objectives of this funding opportunity, the following evaluation criteria will be used: (the Big Bolded Heads)

# Quality of project:
    - Extent to which the application responds to the objectives;
    - Appropriateness of the proposed approach; and
    - Appropriateness of the budget and justification for amount requested.

# Quality of Applicants:
    - Track record of team members in fields related of proposed research;
    - Ability of the project team to carry out the proposed research; and
    - Ability of team to quickly mobilize necessary resources.

# Impact of the Research:
    - Alignment to research areas;
    - Potential to contribute to the global response to COVID-19. (Updated: 2020-02-14)

----------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview

Information related to health risks and healthy behaviour is typically generated by scientists and distilled into recommendations by public-health agencies. From there it is often transmitted by mass media to the public and. Misinformation, generated by careless or irresponsible scientists, pseudo-scientists, or product-marketers can follow a similar route.
During disease outbreaks of international concern, like 2003 SARS, 2009 H1N1, 2014 Ebola, or the current COVID-19 outbreak, this process is both compressed and amplified; this process greatly affects public perceptions and behaviours.

The proposed research will study how information flows between forums, including scientific publications; governmental policies and agency recommendations; and mass and social media -- and investigate how it affects public perceptions and behaviours. 
Our inter-disciplinary group will analyze these flows by combining textual and contextual analysis; AI-assisted human-supervised data mining; time-series analysis; and dynamical modeling.

The project will be organized around three Research Questions (RQs), all based on the Social and policy countermeasures research area from the funding opportunity:

- RQ1: How does information (and misinformation) travel between scientists, public-health workers, mass media and social media? (_based on funding opportunity research sub-area_: ``cultural dimensions of the epidemic'')

- RQ2: How does communication affect public behaviour and the course of the outbreak? (_research sub-area_: ``feasibility and effectiveness of public health response'') 

- RQ3: How can scientists and policy-makers evaluate and improve the effectiveness of their communication? (_research sub-area_: ``strategies to combat misinformation'')
    
## Applicants

The principal applicants Drs. Earn (NPI) and Dushoff (PI) have a long history of influential research on disease outbreaks. 
Co-Applicant are integrated around accomplished multidisciplinary researchers with extensive experience in their respective fields.
Shi, a social-scientist with extensive experience in social and health beahvior; 
Yeh, XXXXXXXX;
Carenini and Jang, are accomplished computer scientist with extensive experience in artifical intelligence (AI) and computational linguistics.
Loeb,  an infectious disease clinician and epidemiologist with broad experience in practical public health issues.
Bolker, a highly accomplished ecological statistician with extensive experience in spatial-dynamical modeling, statistical modeling and statistical software.
Li, a disease modelling statistician in epidemic forecasting and is experienced working with large databases. 

## Collaborative Team
In addition, we have an extensive collaborative team supporting and enchance the research, providing expert opinions on results, knowledge translation and communication.

Dr. Naveed Z. Janjua at the BCCDC, leads data and analytic services and was involved in the 2009 H1N1 pandemic response.
Dr. Xing Peng Jiang at WuHan China, ...
Dr. Pascal Michel, Chief Science Officer at Public Health Agency of Canada, Chief Science Officer, Dr. Pascal Michel role is to understand high-level inter-relationships between various programs and priorities. 
Dr. Nai Rui Chng is a Political Scientist in the UK, with an interest in the development and evaluation of complex interventions in health, social and environmental policy domains.

## Response

Our team is ready to respond rapidly, and in fact has already started doing so. Co-applicant Jang has begun to collect twitter data, and co-applicant Li has been working on curating data as well as transcribing epidemic reports released by National Health Commission of China about the epidemic. Co-applicant Shi has interim funding to begin working on gathering google trends and media data as soon as this proposal is submitted.


## Applications

### Real-time identification and response
We will combine our analysis results to identify examples of misinformation spreading well; good information spreading poorly; and public over- and under-reaction. We will work directly with team members at BCCDC, knowledge users at PHAC and their associates to develop and evaluate messaging strategies. We will also share information about spreading misinformation with public-health workers and the public, through twitter, blog posts and a dedicated web site. 

### Academic outreach
We will share our methods and results through peer-reviewed papers and academic conferences. 

### Software and data
To the extent possible, all of the software developed for this project will be based on open platforms (primarily python and R). All software will be shared publicly via version-control repositories. In particular, the tools we develop to assist textual analysis have the potential to find a wide audience, but we will also share software for applied time-series analysis and dynamical modeling.
